# Unraveling the Web -- Following Cincinnatus’s Escape from the Prison of the Self

Spiders are known to be masters of illusion. Spinning their webs, no two ever the same, they create beautiful works of art to entrap their prey and sustain themselves. They thrive off of the suffering of their victims. This entrapment and suffering is not unlike that of the one Cincinnatus C., protagonist of Vladimir Nabokov’s Invitation to a Beheading, finds himself in. Upon being sentenced to death in a whisper, Cincinnatus begins on a grueling journey to escape his destiny. Over the course of his novel, Nabokov meticulously unfolds the story of Cincinnatus’s escape by way of another character: the spider and its web. Through the spider it is made evident that Cincinnatus finds his way out of the prison of the self by starving his negative imaginative lens and redirecting his power to see his world for what it really is.

Upon the completion of his trial, Cincinnatus returns to his cell and insists on being alone. Though his lawyer abides by his request, we are soon informed that Cincinnatus is not truly alone as he has the company of his cellmate: the spider. Nabokov explains that spiders are the “official friend of the jailed (Nabokov, 13)”. Such a friendship seems perfectly standard given the situation; a lone man and his friendly arachnid companion passing the time until Cincinnatus beheading. It is even said that “[the spider] lowered itself on a thread from the ceiling (Nabokov, 13).” Such is a perfectly rational thing to expect a spider to do. The author further paints the spider into the scene as he describes the cell upon Cincinnatus’s entry: “Cincinnatus (...) entered his lighted cell. He turned around, but already he was locked in. O horrible! The pencil glistened on the table. The spider sat on the yellow wall (Nabokov, 20).” This detailed imagery works to paint the spider as a dutiful observer of Cincinnatus, contributing to the imagery of the prison from the beginning of the novel. Initial mention of the spider is nearly negligible, as it seems as nothing more than a peculiar minor detail in the story to set the scene. However the audience will come to see how the spider is a valuable actor in the theatrical performance of the novel deeply aiding in upholding the illusion of Cincinnatus’s imprisonment. It is not until later in the novel, as Cincinnatus’s negative imagination begins to falter, that one begins to see the spider for what it really is.

Over the course of the novel Rodion makes it a point to tend to the spider among his other duties in tidying up Cincinnatus’s cell. While reflecting on his work and boasting upon successful completion of such chores, Nabokov notes how “[Rodion] seemed particularly proud of the fact that the spider was enthroned in a clean, impeccably correct web, which had been created, it was clear, just a moment before (Nabokov, 78).” Here the reader finds themselves questioning: how could such a perfectly clean web could be created so quickly and why? This comment sparks the beginning of the unraveling of the web of illusion Cincinnatus is trapped in. As Rodion is diligent in setting the scene, the audience is introduced to how absurd this seemingly simple yellow cell truly is and how much work goes in to upholding it. After all, what cell gets maid service where they create webs instead of taking them down. It is at this point that one begins to see how the spider is a critical vehicle for driving the narrative that the trap that Cincinnatus finds himself in is a superficial one, requiring a significant amount of maintenance. Such maintenance is not only supported by Rodion, but by Cincinnatus himself internally. Prior to his encounter with Rodion, Cincinnatus pleads to Rodion’s daughter Emmie saying “Won’t you please take me out there? (...) I beseech you (Nabokov, 77).” Cincinnatus begging Emmie for freedom prior to the web keeping clearly displays the connection between the himself and the Spider; Cincinnatus is desperate in his need to escape from his prison but he is unwilling to do so for himself. He is delusional enough to look to a child for a way out and in doing so fuels his victimhood and by proxy his parasitic “caretaker” relationship with Rodion. His unwillingness to find his own way out only upholds prison of the self as he is stuck in his negative perception of his life.

As the novel progresses Cincinnatus continues seeking salvation by irrational means. However, the audience begins to see his transformation in redirecting his power from upholding the illusion to critically analyzing his surroundings. This is made evident when Nabokov writes “He had by now made a completely precise study of [the cell] — he knew it much better than, for instance, the room where he had lived for many years (Nabokov, 118).” It is often said that one’s environment is a reflection of the self. Bearing this in mind, one can see how Cincinnatus’s thorough study of his environment plays a crucial role in his journey from the prison of the self as he is spending time thoroughly reflecting on the prison in which he finds himself. In taking on his analytical mindset, Cincinnatus begins to dismantle his prison of the self and slowly begins to find his way to freedom. In later descriptions of the cell, Nabokov further speaks to the spider in relation to props: “Of the three items of furniture — cot, table, chair — only the last was movable. The spider also moved (Nabokov, 119).” The way in which the spider is mentioned in tandem with the set futhers the point that this spider may not be as much of a live arachnid as one had initially thought it to be, and perhaps the cell is not as sound as one had initially thought it to be. Though the language at the half-way point of the novel remains ambiguous, as the spider does “move,” the unraveling of the web continues and the true nature of the spider is brought to life. The passage continues:

> “[The spider’s] paws folded so that the furry elbows stuck out at the sides, it would gaze with round hazel eyes at the hand with the pencil extended toward it, and would begin to back away, without taking its eyes off it. It was most eager, however, to take a fly or a moth from the large fingers of Rodion (Nabokov, 119).”

The way in which it is described that the spider feeds from the fingers of Rodion shows how the image of the spider is directly dependent upon the oppressive hand of Cincinnatus’s jailer that Cincinnatus has conjured for himself. Additionally, as the spider diligently looks upon Cincinnatus as he writes and begins to back away clearly illustrates the way in which the illusion has begun to falter, cowering in the face of Cincinnatus’s power. The more Cincinnatus begins to write and unpack his thoughts and expressions, the more his perception of his surroundings shifts into reality as he develops strength within himself. The spider that once previously lowered itself from the ceiling and did tricks for Cincinnatus and the jailers now retreats in fear as Cincinnatus writes and gains control over his story.

As Cincinatus begins to write more feverishly he effectively gains control over his narrative. As a result, the audience sees how the web of illusion further unravels as the spider, the extension of his prison of the self, is also starved. In chapter 19 Nabokov illustrates Rodion’s final feeding of the spider: “He was going to pull up the chair, as he always did, in order to stand up on it and deliver the victim to the voracious spider on his solid web (the beast was already puffing himself up, sensing the prey) (Nabokov, 202-203).” The image of the ritual greatly foreshadows the one that follows in chapter 20, as Cincinnatus is walked up to his scaffold. However the ritual does not go according to plan as the victim, the moth, breaks free from Rodion’s hands and escapes unscathed out of sight of his captor. This development breaks the image of Rodion as an effective “caretaker” and, much like the moth to the spider, brings to light the potential of Cincinnatus as a diligent survivor of his sentence. Furthermore, the audience later learns that “Cincinnatus, however, had seen perfectly well where the moth had settled (Nabokov, 202-203).” This starvation of the spider and the salvation of the moth directly correlates to the way in which Cincinnatus has starved the illusion of his imprisonment and has instead looked to the future for a hopeful escape and a future of transformation. The allusion of the spider is a powerful one constantly referenced over the course of the novel giving us insight into Cincinnatus’s mind.

To drive home this point, it is revealed that Cincinnatus’s cellmate is not the live arachnid we were introduced to. It is made evident later within the novel that the illusion has been shattered as Rodrig enters yet again to partake in his ritual cleansing of the cell:

> “(…) with the broom, [Rodrig] pulled down the thick grey cobweb and with it the spider, which he had once nursed with such care. To while away the time Roman picked up the spider. Crudely but cleverly made, it consisted of a round plush body with twitching legs made of springs, and, there was, attached to the middle of its back, a long elastic, by the end of which Roman was holding it suspended, moving his hand up and down so that the elastic alternately contracted and extended and the spider rose and fell (Nabokov, 210).”

Finally, the true image of Cincinnatus’s companion is brought to light: it is but a prop in the cell. The audience sees with full clarity that Cincinnatus’s cellmate was nothing more than a prop made to support this theatrical performance of Cincinnatus’s imprisonment. The description of the “cleverly made” spider shows us that this prison that Cincinnatus is trapped in is nothing more than an illusion he has conjured and given more power than it had deserved. Now that the web has been destroyed, and the spider brought to light, the entire scene so delicately created begins to fade away. Nabokov writes “Plaster began to fall from the ceiling. A crack described a tortuous course across the wall. The cell, no longer needed, was quite obviously disintegrating (Nabokov, 211).” This disintegration follows Cincinnatus as he moves throughout the rest of the novel, carrying with him the power of seeing life for what it truly is and he breaks free from his prison of the self. Through the deconstruction of the spider as the keeper of the illusion, one sees the power in starving the negative mindset and the significance of redirecting that energy into the self to reshape one’s perception of the world as one to take by the reigns and move through with confidence.

Though often clever in trapping their prey, the spider was no match for Cincinnatus. Nabokov uses the spider as a vehicle to drive the illusion Cincinnatus finds himself trapped in. As the illusion is starved so is the image of the spider, thus leading to the deconstruction of Cincinnatus’s prison and the end of his sentence. Through the spider it is made evident that Cincinnatus finds his way out of the prison of the self by starving his negative imaginative lens and redirecting his power to see his world for what it really is. Perhaps the best bug repellent is not to see one self as the victim, but by getting down to the root of the issue and attacking it head on and unraveling the web.

MW
